---
layout: post
title: "Wrapping up a Foobar Diversion"
modified:
categories: blog
excerpt:
tags: []
image:
  feature:
date: 2017-02-22T08:08:50-04:00
---

### The Moment
While sitting in a lecture on handling exceptions in Python, I naturally googled 'python try except' when my world got turned upside down. The main browser window split open and I entered into the world of the foobar challenge. The next six weeks became a blur of working on the challenges, finishing up my data science immersive capstone project(see [blog](https://avmotamed.github.io/blog/blog/GA-capstone/) and [repository](https://github.com/avmotamed/Projects/tree/master/Predicting_Click_Through)), spending time with my two little guys when I was home, and last but not least trying to get a least a little bit of sleep here and there. [I also must thank my wife for taking up the slack and giving me as much time as possible to get things done.]

### Getting Underway
The competition is currently split into five difficulty levels, with an increasing number of challenges for each level with the time allowed also increasing as the levels increased.

Most of the first three levels where relatively straight forward, with the main issue being that only standard libraries are allowed. So things like matrix multiplication took a little more effort without numpy. There was a good mix of probability, simple encryption, and some basic discrete counting problems.

While the end of level three was a bit challenging, the real slowdown came with the start of level four, which allowed two weeks for each problem (with good reason). From my perspective, the challenge came more on understanding the mathematical theory behind the problem than the actual coding (although coding still did take some time). These problems where more about counting and geometric relationships.

### The Light at the End of the Tunnel
After wrapping up level four, I felt pretty good going into the final level, which had a time limit of 22 days (!). After about a week of trying to decipher the theory behind the problem, my outlook darkened somewhat. After about another week, I was close to despondent, as I started to grasp the theory (dealing with combinatorics) but was still unable to decipher some of the notation. At this point I was looking in academic papers and trying to wrap my head around what I found to be some fairly esoteric concepts.

Then the aha moment arrived during some down time after the kids were asleep I was browsing more papers while half-heartedly taking part in a conversation with my wife and some friends we were visiting over the long weekend. A side note on the symbology used was the key to me deciphering order of operations needed.

I bookmarked the page, tried to contain my excitement, and promptly called it a night and passed out. The next evening I was able to workout the coding logic to the symbolic math, and then the next day (yesterday), after a little debugging of two typos, I was able to verify and submit the solution.

### Final Thoughts
I found the challenges to be very engaging and a great deal of fun. As they got more difficult, the drive became stronger to push through and figure them out.

As the levels progressed, the emphasis went from simple brute force solutions to trying to find more elegant/efficient solutions. Starting with level three, I started to get 'time limit exceeded' errors on running some of my more brute force code. I would say my overall programming capability has taken a dramatic step forward during these challenges.

The first few challenges were not simple, but could be worked through with a bit of thought and some efficient code. As the difficulty increased, the emphasis (from my perspective) appeared to shift more towards the mathematical theory to help find a solution that would run in the time allowed. In the end I felt I was  straddling between the realms of theory and coding.

The challenges have been such a constant presence over the past weeks, that I currently feel a little lost knowing their is no challenge waiting for me at the end of the day.

Now it is just a matter of seeing where this may lead...
